**Title:** *Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Internet*

**Author:** Sherry Turkle

**Year: **1995

**Keywords: **internet, identity, MUDs, online communities, technology and
culture

 

**Summary: **The book largely focuses on how identity is constructed within and
through online communities, primarily text-based MUD (Multi-User Domain) groups.
Much of Turkle’s argument centers on the notion that computer technologies
foster a “culture of simulations” that is based on a post-modern decentering of
the self where users have the flexibility to construct identities and express
those identities in simulated online spaces. She suggests that the unstructured
capabilities of these online interactions allow people new power to experiment
with behaviors and performances of the self, but that they are not wholly
removed from the “real world” or at least physical world. In the last two
chapters, Turkle considers some of the implications (largely coded as negative)
of these online culture formations, describing concerns about confusion,
consumption, and addiction. In the final chapter, she reconnects the online
behaviors she has observed to psychoanalytic theories of the self and suggests
that these spaces offer an opportunity to explore and learn how the self is
constructed and to gain self knowledge.

 

**Theories/Methods:**

-   Methodology appears to be largely qualitative analysis and theoretical
    synthesis based on interviews. Primarily a sociological study.

-   Relies heavily on Baudrillard’s concept of simulation (though it’s not
    deeply fleshed out)

-   Theoretical investment in psychoanalysis and postmodernism.

 

**Key/Interesting Terms and Concepts:**

“Culture of Simulation"

“Decentered self"

“Computer Holding Power"

Multiple of computer relationships: (p.35)

-   Hobbyists

-   Hackers

-   Users

Relationship between “calculation” and “simulation” of computes:
interfaces/aesthetics

“Hard” versus “soft programming” and “Soft Mastery” and bricolage (p. 59)

-   experimentation/accessibility leads to rule discovery and pluralism

Three reactions to seductions of simulation:

1.  Accept it on it’s own terms (resignation)

2.  Reject simulations (not real)

3.  Challenge to create social criticism (challenge assumptions, sims as
    consciousness raising)

“parallel identities” (p.188)

Virtual sex and gender

“depaysement” = public revelation

“Flexible self”

 

 

 

 

 

**Interesting /Provocative quotes: **

*“…windows have become a powerful metaphor for thinking about the self as a
multiple, distributed system. […] The life practice of windows is that of a
decentered self that exists in many worlds and plays many roles at the same
time.” p. 14*

*“Computers embody postmodern theory”* p. 18

*“…the role that technology is playing get creation of a new social and cultural
sensibility”* p. 22

*“…I argue that it is computer screens where we project ourselves onto our own
dramas, dramas in which we are producer, director, and star. […] We are using
life on computer screens to become comfortable with new ways of thinking about
evolution, relationships, sexuality, politics, and identity.”* p. 26

Object creates new way of thinking through simulation -* “the personal computer
culture’s most compelling objects give people a way to think concretely about an
identity crisis. In simulation, identity can be fluid and multiple, a signifier
no longer clearly points to a thing that is signified, and understanding is less
likely to proceed through analysis than by navigating through virtual space.”
*p. 49

*“Once we take virtuality as a way of life, we need a new language for talking
about the simplest things.”* p. 231

*“But is it sensible to suggest that the way to revitalize community is to sit
alone in our rooms, typing at our networked computers and filling our lives with
virtual friends?” *p.235

*“…the many manifestations of multiplicity in our culture, including the
adoption of online personae, are contributing to a general reconsidering of
traditional, unitary notions of identity.”* p. 260

 

**Key Questions:**

To what extent is Turkle’s story and arguments based in technological
determinism? What are the implications for that assumption in specific relation
to identity studies?

 

Do we agree/disagree with Turkle’s arguments about calcultion/similation and
hard/soft programming? How do these relate or compare to McPherson’s argument
about Unix?

 

Is simulation vs. reality a fruitful dichotomy for talking about computers?

 

How might we connect the online identity performances Turkle describes with the
concept of identity performance more broadly (i.e. Butler)? Is it the same or
different? Why?

 

To what extent are we satisfied with Turkle’s relaying of online behavior with
real-world behavior? Does she make the case that they are different or the same?
How might we fill in these gaps?

 

In chapter 8, Turkle seems to argue that gender performance online might lead to
more empathy and understanding, do we buy this? How might examples like Mr.
Bungle and the concept of “cat fishing” augment this argument?

 

How are social/moral codes online created or enforced? How might identity play
within online communities enhance or inhibit the creation and enforcement of
these codes?

 
